In
the last few classes we have looked at the
CMOS logic circuit and some of its variations
or efforts to improve the performance of a
CMOS circuits. Today’s class we shall again
look at another variation of the CMOS circuit.
Now before going into that let us first look
at the advantage of a CMOS gate in comparison
with other logic families in the MOS family.
The CMOS as we know, the major advantage is
that it has a zero static power dissipation.
That is because under static conditions when
the NMOS is on, the PMOS is off and when the
PMOS is on, the NMOS is off. So there is no
actual current flowing from the supply to
the ground. The static power dissipation is
zero. The power dissipation only occurs when
the output is switched from one level to the
other, from output high to output low or from
low to high. So that is a hallmark of the
good circuit that is the power dissipation,
the power is mostly consumed in switching
and there is no wastage of power in the static
condition.
CMOS also has another advantage that is the
output low is not determined by the sizes
of the transistor. That is it is basically
a non ratio logic in the sense that the output
low does not really depend upon the ratios
or the widths of the individual transistors
which is true in the case of other logic MOS
logic families because for example in the
logic family with a depletion mode load, the
load transistor is always on. The output low
will be determined by the widths of the individual
transistors. This is not the case in the case
of CMOS. So in fact one can use a small dimension,
one can use the minimum size transistors because
the output voltage is not really determined
by the sizes of that individual transistor
which of course results in a saving area.
That is one of the advantages of CMOS when
compared to other logic families.
Now another advantage would be while switching,
when the output is to be charged say we have
an output capacitance and the output voltage
has to switch from low to high that is the
output capacitance has to be charged. Then
what happens is the NMOS transistor is off
and the PMOS is on and the current flows through
the PMOS to charge the output capacitance.
In this case since the NMOS is on, the entire
PMOS current can be used to drive the output
capacitance. On the other hand when the output
has to go from a high to low that is this
output capacitance has to be discharged then
what happens is that the PMOS is off, the
NMOS is on and the entire NMOS current can
be used to discharge the output capacitance.
Since the PMOS is off, which is not the case
of other logic families like again the NMOS
logic families where the load transistor would
always be on with the result that the current
which is discharging the capacitance is the
difference of the currents of the driver transistor
and the load transistor.
This is a major advantage of course here one
must also point out that since the dimension
of the NMOS and the PMOS transistors are the
same then the PMOS would have a lower current
because of the lower mobility of holes. In
fact if one has to go for equal on and off
times then one has to increase the width of
the PMOS transistor but that is a small disadvantage.
The major advantages in the case of a NMOS
is that you have zero static power dissipation
and also we can have almost minimum size transistors
and also while switching on and off, since
the two currents do not clash, one can have
fast switching also. Even with these advantages
and also acknowledging the fact that the CMOS
has been the main stay of the VLSI for a long
time, this is not the ultimate circuit in
the sense that there is also a lot of improvements
which can take place.
For example CMOS is not the fastest logic
family. The fastest logic families are still
the bi polar logic family that is the ECL
and the main reason for this is that for the
bi polar transistor the trans conductance
is the highest. The bi polar transistor has
a much higher trans conductance than MOS transistors
because of the exponential relation of the
output current with the input voltage. So
that is a major advantage of the bi polar
transistors and also the current drive capability
or bi polar transistors is more than that
of the MOS counter parts. If one has to drive
a large current, one would prefer to use the
bi polar transistor because if one has to
drive the same current with a MOS transistor,
one would require a huge size transistor which
would take up a lot of area. Basically the
bi polar transistor have certain inherent
advantages that is the higher trans conductance
as well as larger current drive capabilities
which also makes them very highly suitable
for high speed logic circuits. On the one
hand we have the advantage of CMOS that is
zero static power dissipation and some other
advantages.
On the other hand we have the bi polar transistors
which have certain advantages like being a
high speed logic family, by being a high speed
device in the sense you have a higher trans
conductance. Now if we can have a logic family
which derives the advantages of both that
is we have on the one hand logic family which
has a zero static power dissipation and on
the other hand it has a very high current
drive capability that is it can drive large
currents to charge and discharge the output
capacitances. Then of course using the bi
polar transistor then of course it would be
sort of best of the both worlds. so that is
what is attempted in the bi CMOS logic family
which is basically a CMOS circuit which includes
bi polar transistors in the driving part where
use a bi polar transistor to drive large output
currents and this is used to speed up the
circuit and give better performance.
So we shall discuss this bi CMOS logic circuit
in today’s class. Let us look at the bi
CMOS inverter. What you have is a PMOS is
driving a bi polar transistor and then you
have an NMOS which also drives another bi
polar transistor and this is the input here
and you have the output here, this is applied
voltage. So you have Vin and we have Vout.
So the input side it is like a CMOS, you have
a PMOS and a NMOS which are shorted and connected
to the input.
Now what happens is when the input is low
say zero volts, this NMOS will be off and
the PMOS will be on. Now when the PMOS is
on, a current will flow in this direction
and this current forms the base current of
the bi polar transistor. So if the PMOS current
is ID if you say then the base current of
the bi polar transistor is ID. You would have
an output current beta plus one times because
the output current is actually the emitter
current of the bi polar transistor. So beta
plus one times ID that is the current which
flows and is going to charge the output capacitances.
On the other hand since the NMOS is off then
the base current of this lower bi polar transistor
is zero, so this lower bi polar transistor
is off. So it is not conducting.
So when the upper bi polar transistor is conducting,
the lower bi polar transistor is not conducting.
Basically once this output capacitance is
charged then there will be no current flowing
because although the upper transistor would
be in a conducting state, the lower transistor
is off and so there would be no static current
flowing in this logic gate. On the other hand
if you look at the other situation, when the
input is high say VDD then you have a high
gate voltage for the NMOS transistor here.
So this NMOS transistor is on whereas this
PMOS transistor is off. Now since this NMOS
transistor is on, a current would flow in
this direction. Again this current is going
to be the base current of this bi polar transistor
and since we have a current ID which is actually
the drain current of the of the MOS device.
If the base current of the bi polar transistor
is ID then the total current which is flowing,
which is actually going to be in this direction
now that is the total current is the sum of
the collector current of this bi polar transistor
plus the drain current of this MOS. So that
is going to be beta plus one times ID again
but it would flow in the opposite direction
and it would help to discharge the output
capacitance. When the NMOS transistor turns
on, a current would tend to flow in a direction
which discharges the output capacitance. The
discharging current is now beta plus one times
ID. On the other hand since this PMOS transistor
is now off because you have a high input,
the PMOS transistor is off then there is no
base current for upper bi polar transistor
here. So this upper bi polar transistor is
going to be off.
So when the lower bi polar transistor is on,
the upper bi polar transistor is off. So again
in the steady state you would have no static
power dissipation. Once the output capacitance
is discharge then no further current would
be flowing. Because although the lower transistor
is in a conducting state, the upper transistor
is in a non conducting state.
If you look at the circuit, it retains the
advantages of the CMOS in the sense that again
when the upper half is conducting, the lower
half is off and when the lower half is conducting,
the upper half is on. So both upper half and
lower half are never on simultaneously in
the steady state. So the static power dissipation
is zero. On the other hand if you look at
the advantages compared with CMOS, we find
that the charging and discharging currents
are now beta plus one times ID whereas in
the case of a CMOS the current which was driving
the output capacitances, the charging or discharging
the output capacitance was only ID.
We have a gain of beta plus one, although
this circuit retains the advantages of the
CMOS, it has an additional gain of beta plus
one. Since we are now charging and discharging
the output capacitances with higher current,
the time required to charge or discharge the
capacitance would be less in the sense that
the operation would be speeded up. So this
is going to operate at a much higher speed
than the corresponding CMOS.
If you look at the delay curves of the CMOS
and the bi CMOS, if you plot the delay, this
is the say delay and you have the load capacitance.
Now for a CMOS, if it goes like this, we know
that the current you can write I is equal
to C dV dT so delta V is the logics swing
and the time is delta T for the output capacitance
to change by delta V and if this of course
assumes a constant current is used to charge
or discharge the capacitance. So we can write
td is equal to C delta V by I.
So the slope of this curve is going to be
delta V which is the logic swing by I. Now
this is for the CMOS whereas for a bi CMOS
what we have now is this current which is
the current for the ID, if we call the drain
current in the case of CMOS, this is a drain
currents which are used to drive the capacitances.
Now for a bi CMOS since the current which
is now charging or discharging the capacitances
is beta plus one times ID, you have a curve
like this. This is the slope, the slope of
the curve is going to be reduced. So you have
delta V by beta plus one ID, this is the slope
for the bi CMOS curve. So we see that for
the bi CMOS even with a large change in capacitance,
the delay does not change by much whereas
in the case of CMOS, if you are driving a
large capacitance the delay changes much.
Of course initially for very low capacitance
the bi CMOS may have a slightly higher delay
because of the fact that you are introducing
additional components in a bi CMOS but especially
for larger capacitances because of the fact
that the delays almost flat, for larger capacitances
the bi CMOS will be operating with the much
lesser delay compared to the corresponding
the CMOS. So that is the advantage of bi CMOS
compared to the CMOS. There is a small disadvantage
which we shall also point out here and we
shall discuss in detail some time later.
The disadvantage in this case for the bi CMOS
is that when the output voltage for example
when we are charging the output capacitance
and when the PMOS is on, this bi polar transistor
gets a base drive, the output capacitance
is getting charged, the output voltage raises
but once the output voltage raises to VDD
minus VBE, when the output voltage is equal
to VDD minus VBE that is VBE is the base emitter
drop of the bi polar transistor then what
happens is say VBE is point seven volts or
VON of the bi polar transistor. After that
if the output were to raise further then the
base emitter drop of the bi polar transistor
would reduce to below VON which means that
it is no longer going to be in a conducting
state. The output voltage will raise to almost
close to VDD. That is VDD minus VON very fast
because of the action of the bi polar transistor.
After that what happens is because we require
a certain voltage drop across the base emitter
of the bi polar transistor to maintain it
in the on condition, the output voltage would
stop raising any further I mean it will raise
but very slowly.
Similarly when the output capacitance is going
to be discharged, the current flows through
into the bi polar transistor as the drain
current of the MOS. Now here again the base
voltage of the bi polar transistor has to
be around 0.6 to 0.7 volts. Now when the output
voltage falls to that value close to 0.6 volts,
what happens is this voltage collector voltage
becomes equal to the 0.6 volts. It cannot
fall any further because then the base emitter
voltage is going to be below 0.6 volts which
means that this bi polar transistor is going
to drop very small current and the discharging
becomes extremely slow. Also since the drain
current of the NMOS should flow into base
of the bi polar transistor, the NMOS would
also stop conducting.
The logic swing of the bi CMOS, it is not
a full swing that is from 0 to VDD as in the
case of CMOS but in the bi CMOS, the output
voltage would go from VON to VDD minus VON.
So the swing is from VON to VDD minus VON
where VON is the cutting voltage of the base
emitter of the bi polar transistor which would
be around say 0.6 to 0.7 volts. If you have
a 5 volt operation it would go from say 0.6
to 0.7 volts to around 4.4 volts. So you do
not have full swing operation here. That is
one disadvantage of the bi CMOS when compared
to the CMOS.
We shall look at the implications of this
sometime later. In general we see that the
bi CMOS as lot of advantages compare to CMOS
in the sense that it retains the advantage
of CMOS as being zero static dissipation circuit
at the same time because of the gain of the
bi polar transistor it is a much faster circuit
compared to a CMOS. Especially when driving
large load capacitances. Then there is one
more point to be looked at in this bi CMOS.
One advantage is that this bi polar transistor
does not really go to saturation. Why? because
since the emitter voltage of this bi polar
transistor can only raise to VDD minus VBE
and this is always at VDD which means that
the collector to emitter drop of this VCE
of this bi polar transistor is always going
to be at least 0.6 to 0.7 volts.
So it does not allow it to go to saturation.
In the lower transistor also since the output
voltage does not fall to below 0.6 volts are
so this collector emitter drop is at least
0.6 volt so it does not go to saturation.
But even then what we would like to do is
once the input voltage changes state for example
from low to high say, then what is going to
happen is when the input voltage was low,
the PMOS was conducting and the NMOS was off.
So this transistor was on, upper transistor
was on, this was off. So as this goes from
low to high, this should go from on to off
and this should go from off to on.
Now this on to off should take place very
quickly otherwise what is going to happen
is, we are having a high speed circuits so
we require this off to on should also take
place very fast that is output capacitance
should be discharged very fast because the
lower transistor is going from off to on.
So the discharging current is through this
lower bi polar transistor.
Now if this upper bi polar transistor does
not go off fast then this current is going
to actually affect the switching off or the
discharging of the output capacitance because
the current which is going to discharge the
output capacitance is going to be the difference
of this current drawn by the lower transistor
and the emitter current of the upper transistor,
so that is going to be the difference. This
upper transistor must switch off fast, so
we should ensure that this switching off is
done fast.
So how do we ensure that? You see that there
is no real mechanism in this circuit for a
reverse based current to flow for the bi polar
transistor. We have always stressed that when
we discussed bi polar logic families that
in order to switch off the transistor fast,
you must have a reverse base current flowing
which draws out the base charge and switches
of the bi polar transistor fast. So that is
one drawback in this present form because
there is no mechanism to remove the base charge.
Now let us see how we can improve this circuit
by introducing small changes so that it can
switch off fast. What is done is we have a
circuit like this. This is the NMOS here,
we have the bi polar transistor so this is
the input here, there is another NMOS here
and this NMOS input is drawn from here. So
this is the new inverter.
Now what we have added if we just compare
these two circuits. So what we have added
in the new circuit here is that we have added
an NMOS here and another NMOS here. Now these
two NMOS’s as we can see are connected to
the base of the bi polar transistor and are
basically used to draw out the charges from
the base of the bi polar transistor, when
these transistors have to go from on to off
condition. So when you have a similar transition
at the input that is low to high, this input
then this lower transistor should turn on
from off condition and the upper transistor
should go from on to off. So what happens
is as this goes high then this NMOS transistor
is going to turn on from the off condition
and this is going to conduct and discharge
whatever base charge is there in the bi polar
transistor and help it to switch off faster
because this NMOS is turning on.
This transistor is going to go from off to
on. So basically when this was low, so this
is an inverter here you see that we have a
CMOS inverter here and the output of the CMOS
inverter is actually fed as input here to
this NMOS and which is connected to the base
of the bi polar transistor. So this is going
to draw out the base charge from the bi polar
transistor so what happens is when the input
is low, this is CMOS inverter, this is high
and the input to this NMOS transistor is high
so this is on and it maintains this transistor
in the off condition. So when this output
again goes from high to low then what happens
is this output of the CMOS goes from low to
high and this turns on this transistor which
helps it to discharge whatever base charge
in the bi polar transistor.
So we have two additional transistors here
which help to discharge the base charge of
this bi polar transistors. So this is the
basic form of the bi CMOS inverter. We can
also have other logic gates as in the CMOS,
for example a NAND gate. Now what we have
to do is in the case of a NAND gate, you know
in the case of a CMOS we have two PMOS transistors
in parallel and two NMOS transistors in series.
If we want to have a NAND gate in CMOS, this
is the circuit. Now in a case of a bi CMOS
what we would do is this which is goes to
the base of the bi polar transistor and we
have the lower bi polar transistor here. So
this goes here, this other input actually
draw it here. Then the output of this CMOS
here in CMOS NAND gate goes to the gate of
this NMOS here. This completes the circuit
for the bi CMOS NAND gate.
Just I will explain it once more. So there
are two inputs here bi CMOS NAND gate A and
B. So what happens is when the input in a
NAND gate we know the output goes high, when
any input is low. When any input is low the
output goes high and when both inputs are
high, the output is going to be low.
Now when both inputs are high, both this lower
NMOS transistors are going to conduct. So
both these are conducting as well as these
two are conducting. Now since these two transistors
are in series say the lower half this is in
series, when these are conducting there is
a current flowing this way into the base of
the lower bi polar transistor and so the lower
bi polar transistor is going to be on It is
basically going to discharge the output capacitance
so the output voltage goes low. So when both
these go high, the output is going to go low
and also when both these are high then these
PMOS transistors are off.
So this upper bi polar transistor is off whereas
these two transistor is also on. These two
NMOS are on which enables the discharge of
whatever base charge is in the upper transistor.
When any input goes low so high to low say
here what is going to happen? when this any
input goes low then one of these NMOS transistor
is going to switch off, is going to go in
off condition which means that in the series
path is not conducting which means that the
lower bi polar transistor is not going to
have any base current which means that the
conduct. So the lower bi polar transistor
is off. Now at the same time this is basically
a CMOS NAND gate. This CMOS NAND gate when
any input goes low, the output is going to
go high, we have a high here and which means
that it turns on the upper bi polar transistor
and there is a current flowing in this direction
which is going to charge the output capacitance
and the output is going to have a low to high
transition.
At the same time see, this goes high here,
this gate voltage of this NMOS transistor
here is going to go high. this turns it on
and since this is connected; the drain of
this NMOS is connected to the base of the
bi polar transistor and current is going to
flow out from the base of this bi polar transistor
and help to remove any base charge stored
in the lower bi polar transistor plus speeding
up the switching off of this bi polar transistor.
So the upper bi polar transistor turns on,
the lower bi polar transistor turns off and
a current flows out to charge the output capacitance
and you have a low to high transition. So
this gives the circuit of a CMOS NAND gate.
What we basically have is we have a CMOS NAND
gate here, this is a bi CMOS NAND gate.
So we have a CMOS NAND gate here, we have
the n block of the CMOS here which is actually
driving the lower bi polar transistor and
then the output of the CMOS NAND gate is driving
the gate of this NMOS transistor here which
is helping to switch of the bi polar transistor.
So now if you look at any bi CMOS circuit,
we can actually derive it from the CMOS logic
circuit by drawing it in this from. We shall
draw a general bi CMOS logic circuit. We have
a CMOS gate here so if we are making a bi
CMOS NAND gate, we will have to make a CMOS
NAND gate. If we have a bi CMOS NOR gate you
will have to make a CMOS NOR gate. If you
want any other logic function so this is the
CMOS equivalent of whatever bi CMOS logic
circuit you want to make. So these are the
inputs here for that CMOS then the output
of that goes to the base of the bi polar transistor
and this is connected to the VDD supply voltage.
We have another bi polar transistor here and
then we have the n block of the CMOS. That
is the lower half of this CMOS, the n block
is connected to another bi polar transistor
and this goes to ground and this goes to ground
here and then the output of the CMOS drives
another NMOS transistor here. So this goes
to the gate of this NMOS which is connected
to the base of the bi polar transistor, so
the inputs again come here. Suppose we have
some inputs and for that set of inputs we
must get a logic high say now what happens
is this CMOS which is actually also realizing
that particular function, so what will happen
is this output here is going to go to logic
high.
Now when does in a CMOS the output is going
to go high when the p block conducts and the
n block is off which means that if this output
is going to go high here, this n block is
going to be off because this is a same CMOS,
this is a n block of the CMOS which is the
lower half of that CMOS circuit so this is
going to be off. Now if the n block is off,
the lower transistor is off, you have a high
at the base of the upper bi polar transistor
which means that it conducts and also the
gate of this NMOS transistor here as a high
which means that this also conducts which
removes the base charge of this lower bi polar
transistor. So the upper bi polar transistor
conducts, the lower bi polar transistor is
off so the output is going to go high and
the and the output current is increased by
the current gain of the bi polar transistor.
Similarly if for a particular set of inputs,
the output should go low then we will have
a low here and the n block should conduct
because the output is low in a CMOS when the
n block conducts which means that the lower
bi polar transistor will have a base current
which means that this current is going to
discharge the output capacitance. Also since
this is low here, this NMOS is off which means
that it is not really affecting the output,
it is not going to have any effect on the
circuit. Also since this is a CMOS you have
an n block here which turns on. At that n
block here in the CMOS is going to discharge
whatever base charge is there in this upper
bi polar transistor.
So in this case the output is going to go
low because the lower bi polar transistor
turns on, the upper bi polar transistor is
off. So this is the basic circuit of any bi
CMOS gate. So any CMOS gate can be converted
to a bi CMOS using this particular circuit.
Now this bi CMOS obviously has a lot of advantages
compared to CMOS as we have already seen but
we also said that there was one particular
disadvantage that is we are not having full
logic swing. This particular disadvantage
is it really shows up when we go for low voltage
circuits. See up to a long time, the power
supply voltages in logic circuits where 5
volts that was a standard which was used but
in recent days, the power supply voltages
are being continuously scaled down. There
are lots of reasons for that one is that as
we are going for smaller and smaller devices
to improve the speed as well as to reduce
the power dissipation, the smaller devices
cannot take so high voltages because the electric
fields becomes too large with the result that
there can be break down problem.
So as we reduce the dimension of the device,
we must also reduce the power supply voltages.
The power supply voltages are also reduced
to reduce the power dissipation. So in order
to do that if we reduce the power supply voltages,
it really creates problems in the case of
bi CMOS. Now if you look at this circuit here,
when you have an input voltage whatever input
voltage is applied here, if this voltage is
now VDD minus VBE, if you have another VBE
here so the actual voltage for the NMOS is
VDD minus twice VDD. That is also clear here
if you go back to this circuit. So if it is
VDD minus VBE and you have a VBE here, so
what we have is VDD minus twice VBE across
the gate to source of the NMOS.
So you know that the current in a NMOS is
proportional to VGS minus VT. So if the VGS
in this case is now VDD minus twice VBE in
the case of bi CMOS minus VT squared now but
of course you have a current gain of beta
is almost beta, beta is high, beta plus one
can be approximated as beta.
So for a I, for bi CMOS that is charging and
discharging current you will have VDD minus
VT whole square. In a CMOS the entire voltage
is dropped across the transistor, there is
no two VBE drop. Now if you look at a five
volt power supply and say suppose when beta
is fifty, VDD is 5 volts say VBE is 0.8 volts.
This is usually at the higher side but for
smaller devices you usually have that and
say VT is equal to 1 volt. So this ratio R
let us say will be equal to 50 into 5 minus
1.6 minus 1 squared divided by 5 minus 1 squared.
So this is 50 times, this is 2.6, into 2.4
squared divided by 4 squared. So this is basically
0.6 squared that is 0.36, so this will be
around 80.
So the current gain which we have due to bi
CMOS, although we are having a beta of 50
is only 18 here because this is reduced because
of the reduction in the logic swing due to
the bi polar transistor. Now this problem
is going to be more severe as we go for low
voltage circuit. Suppose the VDD is now 3
volts and VT of course will be also reduced,
we have a 3 volt circuits say 0.6 volts then
this ratio is going to be equal to
say 50 (3-1.6- 0.6) squared divided by (3
- 0.6) squared. So this is going to be 50
into, this is 0.8 squared divided by 2.4 squared,
so it is about 5 or so.
This ratio is further reduced so we see that
as we go for low and lower voltage circuits,
this ratio is reduced. The advantage of bi
CMOS is severely reduced as we go for lower
and lower voltage. If we go for say 2.5 volt
circuit for example then the bi CMOS would
not be as advantageous as a CMOS. There are
lot of circuits which has come up which would
like to retain the advantages of bi CMOS even
at low voltages. So what is done is we have
low voltage bi CMOS circuits where an attempt
is made for full swing operation. I will just
give one example which has been used in the
Pentium chip. So what they do is you take
a NAND gate, this is basically a CMOS NAND
then which goes to the bi polar transistor
here and then here the pull down is actually
done with the help of NMOS.
So we don’t use the bi polar transistor
in the pull down because of the fact that
at low voltages it is no longer advantages
to do a pull down because of the extra VBE
drop. One must also remember that here if
you go back to this circuit, the difference
here is that this voltage here for the NMOS,
the source voltage becomes VBE. If you have
VDD minus VBE here so it becomes VDD minus
2 VBE across this but here since the source
of the PMOS is always at VDD, the gate to
source voltage of the PMOS is not so much
affected as in the case of NMOS. So what it
done here is you put an inverter here and
then follow it up with a PMOS. So this is
basically the circuit, there are some other
additional circuitry here which is for preventing
the break down on this transistor but we will
not go into that.
The basic idea here is that these are the
two inputs here. Now when the output goes
high, the output capacitance is going to get
charged up but only up to VDD minus VBE by
this bi polar transistor. After that what
happens is since this output is high, we have
an inverter here, this also CMOS inverter.
So this PMOS input voltage is low which turns
on this PMOS. What happens is this output
voltage goes to VDD minus VBE, the bi polar
transistor helps to pull up the output to
VDD minus VBE, after that the PMOS is there
to pull it up beyond that towards VDD. The
output is going to go to VDD because of this
PMOS, at the same time it will also go to
zero because you don’t have any bi polar
transistor. We have full swing operation from
0 to VDD and so a lot of these circuits are
being developed nowadays for full swing operation,
keeping in mind of the low voltage operation.
This is a particular circuit has been used
in Pentium in fact there are different variations
of this full swing bi CMOS circuits by different
groups of people from different companies
but what we see basically is for the pull
down part, the NMOS goes back to the NMOS.
There is no bi polar transistor but for pull
up the bi polar transistor is used which helps
to speed up the low to high transition of
the output. So with that we come to the end
of this section on basic bi CMOS circuitry,
we shall take up some more applications of
this bi CMOS in the next few classes.